>> My name is Dr. Jude Currivan.
I'm a cosmologist, a planetary
healer, a futurist, an author,
most recently of "The
Cosmic Hologram,"
and an ex-international
businesswoman.
So I've tried a very
scenic route to this point.
I've also researched the nature
of reality and consciousness
literally since I was a little
girl, both experientially
and from research.
So here I am.
>> That was a very
quick summary.
So I understand you've had a
unique background and childhood
to get us to this point.
>> I don't know
how unique it is.
I suspect actually
it's fairly common.
It's just I think most kids,
if they have my experiences,
might have shared them with
other people and been told,
don't be silly.
It's just your imagination.
It's nonsense.
I had the great benefit of
not sharing my experiences
with anybody else
until I was an adult.
And that wasn't because
I was scared of what
people might actually say.
It was more I was
having such a good time.
And those experiences were
experiences of communication
with beings from other realms,
multi-dimensional experiences.
So things like precognitive
dreams, telepathy,
clairaudience, remote
viewing, many synchronicities,
and a lot of validation
of insight and information
that came through
those experiences
that really helped me keep
on that path of exploration
and curiosity that's
continued to this day.
>> Wow, that's fascinating.
So cosmology, you mentioned--
what exactly is that?
>> Well, cosmology means--
in my terms, cosmology
and being a cosmologist
means literally I'm curious
about the nature of reality
itself.
Most scientists who describe
themselves as cosmologists
would say that they
study the whole universe.
But, for me, we can't
understand the whole universe
unless we understand
other non-physical realms
from which the appearance
of our universe emerges.
So, for me, it's a bigger
quest to understand
how what we call our
universe comes into being.
And so I look to understand
its deepest nature, which,
for me, is very much
embodied and embedded
in the nature of
consciousness itself.
>> Could you define for
our viewers consciousness?
>> No, I can't
define consciousness.
Really, if you ask cognitive
scientists and neuroscientists
what is the nature
of consciousness,
probably if you
asked two people,
you'd get three definitions.
It's rather like that.
But, for me, consciousness is
awareness, and awareness playing
out on many different levels.
So it's sentience.
It's a sense of a knowingness
and experience, an awareness
that is self and individuated.
And that is
differentiated from mind
because often the two are
brought together whereas mind
is almost the foundation.
We talk about the infinite
and eternal cosmic mind
as Einstein described and as all
spiritual traditions describe.
But consciousness is
almost like a great thought
coming from the ocean of mind.
So consciousness is thoughts,
is individuation, is awareness.
>> And when you say
the ocean of mind,
does that mean a
collective of some sort,
or is that all just internal?
>> When I talk
about cosmic mind,
I'm talking about the
biggest of big pictures.
I'm talking about what
the ancients called
the ocean, the
ground of all being,
a great mystery, God, cosmic
mind, infinite and eternal.
And with each, the
universes, we are
becoming to understand more and
more, emerge as great thoughts
from that ground of being.
>> So when you say it
emerges as great thoughts,
it sounds like we're
tapping into it somehow.
>> We are because
we're part of it.
So if our universe
is a great thought
in the mind of the
cosmos, then our universe
as that great thought began
nearly 14 billion years ago.
And began not in
a big bang, which
was neither big nor
a bang in the sense
that it was tiny and exquisitely
fine-tuned and ordered.
Our universe began more as the
first moments of a big breath
and has continued ever since.
So our universe and everything
in it is innately intelligent.
It is an aspect, a
thought of cosmic mind
that has its own intelligence
and ever-evolving
self-awareness, consciousness.
>> And, again, just to get
clarity for our viewers 101--
>> Yeah, sure.
>> --that when we talk about
universal, are humans included?
You say all living things.
>> For sure.
>> Is Earth, Mother Nature,
are other animals included?
>> Everything is included.
The entirety of our universe.
Every-- from its first moments,
its most simple element
of hydrogen that
was so perfectly
expressed in the laws
of physics that hydrogen
clustered into stars.
Stars burned that
fuel and, in doing so,
created heavier elements.
Over billions of
years, all of that
became these vast
interstellar dust clouds that
birthed planets, that birthed
solar systems like ours,
and they birthed water planets
like ours, which enable
biological life to then evolve.
So the whole of our
universe is this journey
from simplicity to complexity,
but it is innately intelligent.
And it became more
and more individuated.
So here we are, 14
billion years later.
Having a conversation as
individuated microcosmic
co-creators of our universe's
journey of evolution.
It's cool, isn't it?
>> So where did this innate
intelligence come from?
Do we know yet?
>> This really goes back to
ancient spiritual understandings
because when we go back to
ancient India, which, for me,
is the most profoundly
insightful and wise perspective
of writing, such as the Bhagavad
Gita and the Upanishads,
the Vedic tradition.
The Upanishads basically
say that everything
is consciousness, that mind
and consciousness aren't
something we have.
They are literally what we
and the whole world are.
And now we're discovering that
from a scientific perspective.
So when we talk
about great thoughts
in the mind of the cosmos, the
cosmos itself is pure mind.
Pure mind.
And what we talk of as matter
actually seems very solid,
but it isn't.
It's very ephemeral
and foundationally it's
mind and consciousness.
>> There are a number of
things that you mention.
One of them is
materialistic reductionism.
>> Absolutely.
Well, that's been the
mainstream scientific worldview
that this world,
this universe is
the only reality, this
only material reality,
and that the appearance of
separation is its true nature.
And now that is being turned
completely on its head.
And so what we're realizing
now as cosmologists
and as scientists across
many fields of research
is coming to stand alongside
these ancient spiritual
understandings that actually
the energy and matter and space
and time of our universe are
expressions of a deeper reality.
So they are the appearance
of our universe,
but they're not its
foundational truth.
And its foundational
truth is that our universe
emerges from realms of
essentially cosmic causation,
intention.
So our universe has meaning
and purpose and a journey.
And it's a journey
from simplicity
to complexity and ever-greater
individuated consciousness.
>> And do we know what that
journey is about or what it is?
>> We do because actually,
science with that materialistic
reductionist worldview has
made incredible advances
technologically.
I mean, amazing.
So we can look further out in
the universe than ever before.
We look to tiny and tinier
scales than ever before.
And as we've done that, science
itself has come to realize that
by taking everything apart
and trying to understand it
from that taken-apart
stuff, it actually
has to put it back together
again to really understand it.
And that's what's happening now.
When we put things
back, we realize
that they are greater than
the sum of their parts.
So what we're
realizing is a universe
that is so amazingly set
up from the beginning--
literally, our universe
had instructions,
cosmic instructions, that
we call the laws of physics.
Computer folks would
call them algorithms.
They're literally
the instructions
that enable our universe
to exist and vitally
to evolve as a unified entity.
>> It's interesting how we have
actually picked up on those
instructions, and we
can put them into work.
And how do you think we
got that information?
>> Well, we're
part of the whole.
We are part of our universe.
We're not somehow-- this is the
danger of material reductionism
because--
and because of its
authority, we've
bought into its
myth of separation,
its illusion of separation.
And the problem is our
beliefs drive our behaviors.
So what we-- the stories we
tell are the stories we live.
So this myth of
separation has brought us
to the edge of catastrophe.
But literally, as
it's done so, we've
also begun to wake up
and literally remember
the wholeness of who we are,
the wholeness of reality.
So we are essentially now
accessing this information
that's been there all along.
But it's almost as though
in our own evolution,
we've finally come to a point
where we can access the deeper
truth and the realization,
which mystics have accessed
for thousands of years.
And the Vedic tradition
of ancient India
is a hugely important
example of that.
But modern science
has negated that.
It's peripheralized
that until now.
And it's actually
waking up itself
to this realization
because of the evidence,
because of the evidence.
>> Evidence.
>> What evidence?
Evidence that's so compelling.
Evidence literally across
all scales of existence
from the tiniest to
the whole universe.
We're finding that information
is more fundamental than energy
and matter and space and time.
We realize now
experimentally that when
we delete one bit
of information,
actual heat is released
and in line with theory.
So we're realizing through
those sorts of experiments.
And when we actually
model complex systems,
we realize that the
way they appear to be
is made up of information,
relational dynamic interplay
processes of information
that we can model
and that we're now realizing
is that most fundamental stuff
of reality itself.
So not just at all
scales of these patterns
of information appearing but
across many fields of research.
So it's not just
cosmology, the very big,
but it's biology, complex
systems, chemistry, meteorology.
We're finding these same what's
called fractal patterns playing
out across all scales and not
just through the natural world
but through human behaviors,
through collective human
behaviors.
So we're seeing this playing
out of a conscious cosmos.
Everywhere we look now,
at every scale we look,
and every type of looking
that we do, it's there for us
now to see.
>> And you mentioned
fractal patterns.
What does that mean?
What does that look like?
>> The ancients were very smart.
I mean, they were at
least as smart as we are.
They just had less stuff.
So in ancient Greece
about 2,500 years ago,
there was a realization
that geometry,
such as a triangle or a square,
is all about relationships.
So, for example, if you see a
triangle, it has three sides,
and those sides are in a
relationship with each other.
And the angles, inner
angles of the triangle,
are in a relationship
with each other.
You can scale that triangle
up or scale it down,
and those relationships
stay the same, yeah?
On the advent of
computers, a researcher
called Benoit Mandelbrot
decided to look
at things that didn't look
geometric like coastlines
and the outlines of clouds.
And with the ability to
analyze huge amounts of data,
of information, he
actually found patterns,
and he found
geometrical patterns.
But I haven't yet seen
a triangular cloud.
But when you actually look
at the outline of a cloud,
there are patterns
that are geometric,
but they're fragmented
dimensional patterns.
So that's a very long
way of describing them.
So he came up with the word
"fractal" to describe them.
And if you see a fractal pattern
in nature, leaves and ferns
and shells and galaxies, they
all scale up and scale down.
So you see these
fractal patterns
throughout complex systems.
You see them in ecosystems.
You see them in
weather patterns.
You see them all through
the natural world.
These fractal patterns that
are all informational patterns
of relationship.
>> How do they
become informational?
>> Because everything is
information, literally.
We need to go-- the
20th-century Scientific
Revolution was amazing.
It took us from that old
Newtonian world of absolutes
and things, and it moved us
into relationships and fields,
but it didn't go far enough.
So when we talk about energy
and matter of our universe,
we talk about its space
and time, geeks like myself
who spent a lifetime researching
the nature of reality
are realizing that they are
the appearance of our universe.
But of themselves, they
are not fundamental.
The underpinning
them is information
that expresses itself
as energy and matter
and expresses itself
in a different way
but complementary way
as space and time.
And it's so beautifully
complementary
that when you restate
the laws of physics
as laws of information, you can
see how our universe is made.
You can see how to
make a universe that
exists and evolves.
>> Simply by
putting it that way.
>> It is.
It is.
There's a wonderful
quote, I think,
by Marcel Proust that said,
"The journey of discovery
is not about
discovering new lands.
It's seeing with new eyes."
So we don't need any more maths.
We don't need any
more equations.
We just need to
see with new eyes
that we are innately these
amazing beings of information
that are part of an information
and holographic universe.
>> Well, now we need to
talk about holographic.
>> We do.
We do.
One of the things
that really struck me
from when I was a
very little girl
and literally having
these experiences
of multi-dimensionalities
and telepathy
and all the rest of it--
was I experienced reality
as a hologram.
And holograms hadn't
even been invented then.
I was-- I'm that old.
I'm that old, holograms
hadn't even been invented.
But that-- when they
were, and I started
to become aware of
their properties
that you get the
whole in every part
and every as part of the whole.
So they reflect-- the
parts reflect each other.
That was how I had
experienced reality
since I was four years old.
So it was amazing
then when holography
became not just the
technological holograms but also
an understanding by cosmologists
that our entire universe is
essentially a holographic
projection of consciousness
from its boundary of space
of what we call space.
>> It's funny.
I remember seeing the
hologram in our art studios.
This was the '70s.
When do we--
>> We're talking about
10 years before that.
Yeah.
And by the '70s,
it was very basic.
But what we're realizing
now is our best
high-definition
holograms are pixelated.
Every-- all their information
that they're made up of
is pixelated at a
certain very fine scale.
But our universe is
pixelated at a scale that
is more than 100
trillion trillion times
finer than our
best HD holograms.
>> We try.
We do our best.
We try.
But literally, our
universe is pixelated
at that informational
level at a scale as tiny
compared to an atom as an atom
is to the entire universe.
It's extraordinary.
But that's what we're finding.
And that's what the
evidence is pointing to.
>> So let's back
up a little bit.
And you talked about
separatism a couple of times.
So we should probably talk
more about what that is
and what that means.
>> Sure.
One of the ancient
texts as well is I Ching
in China, Chinese tradition.
And that says in the
beginning is the one.
The one becomes two.
The two becomes three.
And from the three,
10,000 things are born.
In other words,
unity, wholeness,
differentiates itself
into twonesses,
and twonesses into
threenesses, and threenesses
into a multitude of diversity
and differentiation.
But it's not separation.
It's just a sense of
differentiating the wholeness so
that it can experience itself.
If we weren't
differentiated, we couldn't
be having this conversation.
If we weren't differentiated,
the folks watching this film
wouldn't be able to
differentiate and watch it.
The problem is
we've misunderstood
differentiation for separation.
So we think that we're separate.
And yet as Nelson Mandela's
philosophy tells us--
it's a philosophy called Ubuntu.
It's a very profound African
philosophy that says,
I need you to be me.
You need me to be you.
So there's this profound
sense of interconnectedness
that all Indigenous
traditions have
at their heart and
all ancient wisdoms
and universal spiritual
traditions have at their heart.
And yet our modern science,
because of its very powerful
methodology of materialist
reductionism and taking
stuff apart, has focused on
the appearance of separation
rather than its deepest
nature of differentiation
but no separation.
And unless we wake up from
this myth of separation,
I'm not sure we're going to
survive and thrive as a species.
>> Do you think the scientists
confused it themselves?
>> I think they did because one
of the great tenets of science
is I am the observer, and
you are that that I observe,
and we are separate.
And so I can do lots
of experiments on you.
And I can find lots of
information about you.
But we've known since the
advent of quantum physics
that there is no separation
between the observer
and the observed, and that when
we observe something, certainly
the quantum scale, we
literally make it real.
And when we expand that
to the whole universe,
our universe is
non-locally interconnected.
So it exists and evolves
as a unified entity.
But the way it experiences
itself and evolves itself
is into ever-greater
individuation, differentiation,
simplicity to complexity.
But there is no separation.
>> It's so profound.
All right.
So the unified field,
tapping into-- what is it?
Tapping into it, how
does that happen?
I'd love to get into
that more if we could.
>> It's very cool, and
it's actually very simple.
>> So it is.
>> It is.
As I've said, what the
evidence is now showing
and when we restate
the laws of physics
as algorithms, instructions
of information,
we can see how our universe
can exist and evolve.
It exists because
information expresses itself
as energy and matter.
It evolves because
information expresses itself
in a different but
complementary as space and time.
So from that first moment
14 billion years ago,
not as a big bang but as the
first moment of a big breath,
ordered, coherent, the flow of
time and the expansion of space
means that every moment
from that beginning
till now, our universe has
added more and more and more
informational content.
So it's literally grown up.
It's experienced and evolved
and grown up and become
ever greater, self-aware.
But that's what it is in terms
of spacetime and energy matter.
But our whole universe is what's
called non-locally connected.
And that means that it
knows itself at all times.
So think of ourselves
as a universe.
I'm a universe.
I was born 67 years ago, not--
actually, I was born
14 billion years ago,
but that's a whole
different story.
I was born 67 years
ago as a baby.
And as a baby, I had
all the DNA that was
going to be me as I grew up.
I had all the recourse to that.
And yet as time went on, I moved
from being a baby to a toddler
to a teenager to
an adult to me now.
As I did, I expanded.
Literally, my body expanded.
But my experience expanded too.
I experienced the world.
So think of our universe
as a universe soul
as being born as a
baby universe 14--
nearly 14-- 13.8
billion years ago
and has been existing
and evolving ever since.
But just as I have
a coherent body,
so when I grow up,
all my experience,
I know as Jude, as a wholeness.
So our universe is
connected coherently,
what's called non-locally.
So our universe knows
all that is happening.
So when we talk about
the unified field
or we could call what the
ancients call the Akashic
Record, it's the same
sense of our universe
existing and evolving as this
unified non-locally-connected
entity.
And we've managed
to get the evidence
for that now out to 12.2
billion light-years from Earth.
So we've got such great evidence
that all that I'm sharing
is not just coming
from me but is
coming from hugely compelling
evidence brought forward
by many, many, many scientists.
>> Can you give us an idea
of what that evidence is?
>> Well, let's talk two pieces
of evidence that have literally
come forward in the
last couple of years.
The first was in 2017.
And I was talking about
the fractal patterns
that we're seeing underpinning
complex systems at all scales
of existence from
individual atoms
where electrons cluster
in fractal patterns,
when an element changes from
being a metal to an insulator,
through to vast
galactic clusters.
These fractal patterns
are information patterns.
They're the patterns--
they're the signature
of the cosmic hologram.
In 2017, astronomers from five
universities looked at something
called the Cosmic
Microwave Background.
Now, what that is--
CMB.
What that is is the
relic radiation left over
from the earliest
epoch of our universe.
And as our universe
has expanded,
this CMB radiation fills
the whole of space.
In 2017, astronomers,
cosmologists
found the same fractal
patterns throughout the CMB.
So throughout the
whole of space,
those radiation from the very
earliest times of our universe
also show these fractal
patterns that we
find in atoms, we
find in river systems,
we find in the internet,
and we find in galaxies,
we find in the whole of space.
So that's one piece of
information and evidence.
The other is this whole
premise of nonlocality
that within spacetime,
nothing goes faster
than the speed of light.
And yet for our universe
to exist and evolve
as a unified entity, it has
to be non-locally connected.
It has to know itself as a body.
And that came forward, that
nonlocality came forward
as a phenomenon of
quantum physics.
And Einstein called it
spooky action at a distance.
And he really did not like it.
But in the laboratory
since, we've
shown time and time
again that nonlocality
is a real phenomenon.
But for years,
physicists said, oh, it's
only at the quantum scale.
And then they started to
be able to non-locally
connect or entangle organic
molecules, which are vast
compared to the quantum scale,
and even tiny diamonds, which
are vast, but that's not enough.
And by the way, there's
a law or a theorem
that says quantum
physics can only
work at all if our universe
is so non-locally connected.
Anyway in 2017 and
2018, researchers at MIT
did something extraordinary.
They were able to non-locally--
in 2018, non-locally
entangle photons
of light in the laboratory with
starlight from 600 light-years
away to starlight or
quasar light-- and quasars
are very bright galactic bodies.
So they're much, much,
much brighter than stars.
So we can see them
a lot farther away.
So photons in the
laboratory, starlight
600 light-years, light from a
quasar 12.2 billion light-years
away.
That light left that quasar
12.2 billion years ago,
and they're entangled.
So that's showing essentially
that our entire universe
is non-locally connected.
And that is so powerful
because that's, for me--
cosmological scales we're seeing
this wholeness of our universe.
And we're seeing
it at every scale
from that level of wholeness and
that level of entire universe
down to the smallest scales.
>> What are those
smallest scales?
>> It's called the Planck scale.
And when you put together
the laws of physics--
and whether we were doing
it or whether scientists
in a galaxy far, far away
in a long, long time ago
were doing it, the laws of
physics are the laws of physics.
Otherwise, we would not exist.
So the laws of physics
are what they are.
And when you bring the
laws of physics together,
a natural scale of measures
for mass and energy and time
and length and energy--
and temperature emerge.
And these are called
the Planck scale.
That's P-L-A-N-C-K. And they're
named after Max Planck who was
one of the great pioneers
of quantum physics.
And it was Max Planck that said
he believed that consciousness
is primary to the
appearance of our universe,
as have many other
pioneering scientists.
So the digital
information that is
the basic stuff of our universe
is literally pixelated.
The ones and the zeros
of that information
are pixelated the Planck scale.
And the Planck scale in spatial
terms is as tiny compared to,
as I mentioned, an atom as
an atom is to the universe.
And each moment,
each time moment
is like a film of our universe
from its first beginning--
its beginning to
now adds information
at the scale of the Planck time.
And that is ridiculously,
ridiculously tiny.
>> Something that sounds like
we could barely even imagine,
can we?
>> It's so hard.
I mean, if you think of-- if
you think of a normal film--
and I'm not a
technologist on this.
But, say, going back to
when I was growing up,
and instead of being digital,
films were on film slides.
And you turned the frame.
And each frame was
of itself static.
But when you ran
the frames together,
you had the appearance
of continuity.
So if you have a film that,
say, has 100 frames per minute,
100 frames per minute,
at the Planck scale,
our universe adds a trillion
trillion trillion trillion
frames every second.
It is tough, isn't it,
to see how tiny that is.
It literally is 10 to
the minus 44 seconds
is the Planck scale of time.
>> So we're talking about all
of this amazing stuff that's out
there, the nature
of the universe.
And I'm wondering, how is
that connected to intuition?
>> Intuition is natural because
it's when we open ourselves
to that information
field that is reality.
Now, whether we're
conscious of it or not,
we are transmitting and
receiving information.
We are transceivers
of information.
We are dynamic-- we are
dynamic transceivers
of our environment, of each
other, of the whole world.
And so when we intuitively
have that insight,
we're just tapping--
naturally tapping
into the information that's
available for us all the time.
When we have telepathic
communications,
again, that is a natural--
supernormal phenomenon.
Synchronicities, intuitive
insights, remote viewing,
telepathy, precognitive
events are all examples
of us tapping into that
non-local intelligence
of our universe and ourselves
as its microcosmic co-creators.
So supernormal
phenomena are natural
within this whole worldview
of the cosmic hologram,
but they never had a place in
the mainstream reductionist
separatist view of science.
Only when science expands
to welcoming consciousness
and mind, and mind and
consciousness expressed
as meaningful information
does the understanding
expand to naturally embody
all these phenomena.
>> So it seems it's all there.
It's-- what's
standing in the way?
>> Us.
We're standing in
the way because
of our fragmented perspectives
of the nature of reality.
And those fragmented views
have been given to us
by our societies, by our
families, by our teachers,
and by science up till now.
And in the West, science
has had this authority.
And science has done a
great job in many ways,
but it really hasn't
served us well in this way
because science,
in many examples,
has not been prepared to
follow the evidence where
the evidence has led.
So we have amazing scientists
like John Archibald Wheeler,
like David Bohm, like Max
Planck, like Albert Einstein.
Giants.
And Max Planck-- giants in
their field telling us actually
the universe is
more a great thing--
or sorry, the
universe is far more
a great thought
than a great thing.
And that was first said by Sir
James Jeans over a century ago.
So we're now coming to a point
where the evidence is causing
science to literally
turn upside down
and to come to stand
alongside universal wisdom
and spiritual teachings.
It's converging with them to
reveal a cosmology of wholeness,
a cosmology of consciousness,
a science of love
because if love
is about anything,
it's about remembering
the interconnectedness
and community and
wholeness of all that is.
So this literally is
a science of love.
>> So it seems like,
in your opinion--
I'll leave this open.
What do we need to do about
this materialistic reductionism?
>> Well, in my view--
and it's not just my view.
It's about us waking up.
It's about us waking
up and literally
remembering who we
really are and the deeper
nature of reality.
So it's waking up.
It's growing up because this is
a very empowering understanding,
but it calls us, it invites us
to step into that empowerment
and to accept our responsibility
joyously as co-creators
of our realities and,
therefore, responsibility
for how we are in the
world and with the world.
And then we can clean up.
We can clean up all
the traumas that
have come alongside the
luggage, the baggage, that
have come alongside with this
misunderstanding and this buy-in
to the myth of separation,
which is fairly modern.
It really has grown
to an extreme level
in the last few hundred
and even the last 50 years.
So we haven't been having this
worldview, this fragmentation
for the whole of humanity.
It's incredibly recent.
And in one sense, it's
helpful for the technology.
But in an infinitely
more profound way,
it's been a huge disservice
for our evolution
and for the evolution
of our relationship
with Mother Earth
and the cosmos.
>> Well, if it's so recent,
at what point was it--
was it religion?
Was it government?
At what point did
it begin to emerge,
this new concept, this
materialistic reductionism?
>> Well, really, it probably
goes back about 300 years
to the time of Isaac Newton.
And at that time, the
Church had huge authority.
And there were a
number of what's
called natural philosophers.
They weren't called
scientists then.
They were called
natural philosophers
who wanted to understand the
world not just through religion
but through experiment
and testing.
And so the scientific
method was born of saying,
I will research this.
I will look at this.
I will find out more about
it through experiment.
And so there came a deal.
There was a real deal between
the natural philosophers
and the religious authorities.
The religious
authorities would look
after the souls of everyone,
and the natural philosophers
were OK as long as they just
looked at the physical world.
And that became very--
it was very sensible
because if you weren't
willing to just research
the physical world
as a scientist,
you were potentially under house
arrest for the rest of your life
as a heretic as Galileo was,
or you were burnt at the stake
like Giordano Bruno was.
So it was a pretty
dangerous thing
to not just keep to your
little bit of research.
But it creates a schism,
and that schism just grew.
And so scientists
began to denigrate
religion and spirituality.
And spirituality
kept on its track.
So the two just separated
literally in their worldviews.
And science was
very, very powerful.
It brought us the
Industrial Revolution.
It brought us--
well, first of all,
the Enlightenment, the
Industrial Revolution,
and on and on.
It brought us all
the technologies
that make our lives
so much easier today.
But its basic premise was that
this material realm, this realm,
this universe, is all there is.
There are no other
realms beyond it.
Its appearance of separation
is its true reality
that our universe is
essentially an accident,
that evolution
proceeds by accidents,
that after a long, long, long
time, human beings emerged,
evolved, and somehow
our consciousness
arises from our
material brains somehow.
That was the story.
So it's a story of separation,
of accident, of meaninglessness,
and it's wrong.
It's utterly wrong.
So we're now realizing through
the leading-edge science
evidence that it is
fundamentally wrong
and that instead mind and
matter are essentially
one, that mind expresses itself
as what we call energy, matter,
and spacetime, and that mind
and consciousness are something
we have, that what we
and the whole world are,
and that our universe exists and
evolves both as a unified entity
and with meaning
and with purpose
because it's so
exquisitely set up.
It literally exists to
evolve from simplicity
to complexity and
ever-greater levels
of individuated self-awareness.
It's a universe that
is innately intelligent
but, like a human
being growing up,
learns to know
itself and experience
the world in that way.
And it's a world
not of separation.
It's a world of unity
expressed in diversity.
>> I think it was interesting
that you said at one point,
they were called
natural philosophers.
And yet as that schism--
is that what you said?
>> Yeah.
Schism.
>> Schism.
>> Trying to spell
it in my head.
As the schism grew
wider, that no longer
were they studying philosophy.
>> No.
That's a really, really
important perspective
because when quantum
physics came along,
there were innately
some scientists who
are natural philosophers.
They wanted to understand
not just the how but the why.
the even bigger picture.
And it may be apocryphal story,
but there is a story that
on one of the office doors--
I think it was at Princeton--
it would say, philosophers,
don't come in.
It's like, keep out.
We don't want this philosophy.
We don't need to
understand this deeper--
And I think it
was because if you
are going to look at the deeper
meaning of what was coming
forward in terms
of quantum physics
and relativity physics as the
pioneering scientists themselves
understood, you had to
ask the question, what
is the nature of consciousness?
What is the deeper
nature that this
is beginning to reveal to us?
And that was then
just put to one side.
We're not interested.
We don't want to get in con--
And I think the reason
that they didn't
want to bring consciousness in,
which, of course, are now we
having to because
the evidence is
so powerful, is because there
was a concern that consciousness
and the meaning of
life was religious.
So the way to keep religion and
spirituality out of the piece
was to peripheralize
consciousness.
And that elephant in
the room has been there
for almost 100 years.
And so consciousness
studies have tried so hard
to figure out how
consciousness emerges
from a materialistic brain.
It's called the hard question.
The reality is it's
the wrong question.
So only when we turn
everything on its head
and realize that consciousness--
mind and consciousness
expressed as
meaningful information
is the fundamental
reality of our universe.
>> It's all making
more sense to me now.
>> I'm delighted.
>> Me too.
All right.
Let's just see.
I was curious.
The question I have is,
what does the universe
do with all of the information
that is transmitted?
Where is the container?
Is it electric?
>> It's holographic,
essentially.
I mean, what we call the
container of our universe
is its holographic boundary.
And it of itself
is informational.
If you think of a balloon
blowing up from its beginning,
our universe has been
expanding spatially
for nearly 14 billion years.
Time has flowed on.
So if I was cosmic mind having
a thought that is our universe
and I start that
universe in its tiniest
way at the beginning of
spacetime as a big breath,
so I'm essentially using my big
breath to blow up this universe.
So space expands and time
flows when I do that.
But the boundary
of that universe
is the boundary of the balloon.
That boundary of the balloon
is that holographic boundary
on which all the information and
the accumulating information--
as time flows and space
expands, more and more
and more information can
be experienced, explored,
evolved within our universe.
So it's like a human
having a lifetime.
Universes have a lifetime.
And they begin as
baby universes.
And they grow, and
time flows within them,
and they accumulate experience
until they become an elder
universe.
And then what we think
happens, we don't know,
but it may be like a
balloon or a bubble
bursting when it gets to
the end of its lifecycle.
And then in case of universes,
all that information, all
that accumulated experience
and wisdom and knowledge
just dissipates back into
the infinity of cosmic mind,
and other great thoughts,
other universes arise.
So within that
infinity and eternity
of cosmic mind,
thoughts, universes
arise and live and
grow and learn and die.
>> You're a great storyteller.
I just-- I can just picture
us all going, please, more.
>> And by the way, the
scientific evidence is
supporting this.
>> That's the whole point.
Oh, boy.
All right.
So I have a series of questions.
How do we co-create?
What power do we have with this?
What do we need to do
to realize the ability?
Basically, how does every
thought, emotion, word,
and action contribute to the
co-creation of the whole world?
Those were your quotes.
Exactly, how does one
person affect one another
on the other side of the
planet without a computer,
without a telephone, with
all of that-- without-- yeah.
>> Well, when we move into this
understanding that all we call
reality is fundamentally
unified and we are part of that,
there is no separation.
And yet there is differentiation
because otherwise, we'd
be a gray gloop, and
we're not a gray gloop.
We are people.
I have had stories
told to me of twins.
And there's a lot of--
there's a lot of evidence
and experimentation with twin
telepathy showing that twins
are attuned to each
other at subconscious
and conscious levels.
So when something
happens to one twin,
the other is very
often aware of it.
And that is because twins and
stars and people and trees
and everything
within the universe
is fundamentally
non-locally connected.
And yet, and yet to
be differentiated
and to experience and evolve,
within spacetime, there
is a signaling cosmic
speed cop, and it's
called the speed of light.
And if we didn't have
that, we wouldn't
have the sort of appearance of
differentiation and difference
that our universe is so
abundantly and gorgeously
showing us.
So our universe evolves
to both differentiate,
but it does so knowing
itself all the time.
So we affect each other.
We affect our environment.
Our environment affects
us all the time,
whether we're
aware of it or not.
And our conscious
mind, our aware mind
processes a tiny, tiny, tiny
proportion of the information
that's always available to us.
But when we're willing
to open ourselves--
and it is literally
as simple as that,
although there are various
modalities that have been
practiced for thousands of
years such as meditation--
we can attune to
that information.
We can actually deepen and
broaden our intuitive access
to all of that information.
And there are so many ways that
are now open to us to do that.
We live in a generation which
is a global interconnectedness
literally of information
technologically.
So we can access
the way of yoga.
We can access the
way of mindfulness.
We can actually learn how to,
in many, many different ways,
tap into what is our
innate abilities.
>> And when you say-- what
is our innate abilities?
It sounds like maybe each of
us have different abilities.
We don't all have everything.
>> I think we do
have the capacity,
but just as some people are more
gifted in art and others more
gifted in music and others
more gifted in dancing to ABBA
on a Friday night around
the kitchen table,
which I'm really good at,
we have different abilities.
This is the beauty
of differentiation.
Every one of us is unique.
And yet there is a
fundamental commonality.
We're all human in
a human community.
So we're all co-creators of
our collective human psyche.
We're all different notes in
this amazing cosmic symphony.
We're all players in
an improv jazz session
because we don't
know what's coming.
So that symphony
is not yet written.
We're all showing up to
be improv jazz players.
And improv jazz players, they
are great because what they do
is they listen to each other.
They have to because otherwise,
the jazz just goes off.
To keep that coherence,
they need to hear and listen
to each other.
They're literally playing
together into an adventure
that they don't
know the future of.
But they've shown up.
They've been willing
to show up and play
that adventure together.
>> Well, I have a question is,
how do we turn around what we
have already created into
something far better?
>> My sense is that
literally, we are waking up.
Not everyone for sure, but there
are enough people waking up
and then growing up
with this remembering
and cleaning up to help sort out
our inner traumas and patterns
that no longer serve us.
Then we can show up,
not from our ego,
but we can show up in
service as a world server,
in service to something
that's greater than we are.
And then we can link up.
And then we can lift up.
And I feel that's happening.
And, for me, this is a
process of metamorphosis.
Metamorphosis is all
about a biological being
such as a caterpillar
that has the potential
to become a butterfly.
And that caterpillar's
job is to eat.
That caterpillar's
job is to go out
there and eat as much as it can
regardless of the environment.
So unless the environment's
in an ecosystem where there
are enough birds to
eat the caterpillars,
the caterpillar goes wild.
But in a healthy ecosystem,
there are enough caterpillars
and enough birds to ensure that
the caterpillars go forward,
but they don't eat everything.
We're like the caterpillar.
With our fragmented
understanding
of the nature of
reality, we've eaten
as much as we possibly can.
And because we are the dominant
species on this planet,
we have been able to
eat our environment.
We've been able to
eat our fellow animals
and other children of
Gaia because that's
what our beingness, that's what
our awareness has taken us to.
But I think now
we're starting to go
into the chrysalis
of metamorphosis
because it's not sustainable.
The way we are, there's
nothing more to eat.
We've eaten as much
as we possibly can.
And when a caterpillar
gets to that point,
it naturally goes
into a chrysalis.
And when it goes
into a chrysalis,
it starts to break down.
Its body breaks down.
It literally-- its immune
system starts to fail.
But what happens
within that chrysalis
is something extraordinary.
The potential of the
butterfly starts to form,
and it begins to form in
what's called imaginal cells.
The beginning of an antenna,
the beginning of an eye,
the beginning of a wing.
And as that butterfly starts
to create itself into being,
the dying caterpillar
attacks it.
And that attack
strengthens the butterfly.
The butterfly needs
that dying caterpillar
to attack it to strengthen it.
And inevitably, the
caterpillar dissolves away,
and the butterfly strengthens.
And then a day comes when that
butterfly is ready to fly.
And the chrysalis opens,
and the butterfly is free.
And that is our potential.
And to do that is
about remembering
the wholeness of all that is.
And we may not make it.
We may not make it.
But, for me, if we are to make
it, that is the process for us
collectively to come
together, to go through.
That is, for me, the next
step in the potential
of our conscious evolution and
literally our cosmic destiny.
This is, for me, what the
universe is calling to us,
is inviting us to be and to do.
>> Well, I want to make sure
that I give you the opportunity
to say anything that we might
have left out that would be
related to what we're
doing here with intuition.
>> For me, when we come into a
human form, a human beingness,
our societies up till now
have taught us loneliness.
They have not nurtured
us in that wholeness.
So they've taught
us to be lonely.
And as we grow and as we have
the opportunity to remember,
we can undertake a
journey from loneliness
to a sense of aloneness,
to a sense of all oneness.
And that is a journey
of intuitive wisdom.
That is a journey that
isn't about the knowingness
of our minds.
It's partly that.
But that journey from
loneliness to aloneness and then
to all oneness is ever more a
journey of intuitive knowing.
It's an experiential knowing.
It's literal re-membering
of ourselves.
And intuition is such an
incredible way-shower and guide.
And the more we're open
to that intuitive knowing
rather than just the
knowing, here is wisdom,
here is knowledge.
Knowledge is great, but
wisdom is so much better.
And that's the
journey that intuition
can open us to, be a guide
to, be a way-shower with.
And the fellow traveler of
intuition is synchronicity.
They play together
in my experience.
And it's a wonderful place,
a wonderful adventure.
And I would invite anyone to
show up and be part of that.
>> Thank you.
>> Could I ask one question?
>> Yes.
>> So if you were to be speaking
to somebody who was in a more
closed-off position, what is one
thing you would suggest for them
to try to get more in
touch with their intuition?
>> Well, first of all,
I'd give them a huge hug.
And I wouldn't necessarily
say much to them.
I would actually offer them an
experience, a simple experience.
And it can be as
simple as an experience
of just being quiet
and taking some breath
and allowing their
awareness on that breath
to guide them within because
that's where intuition resides.
So just being quiet,
sitting still, away
from all the distractions
and the busyness of the day,
and just doing that every
day even if it's only
for a few minutes
in the morning,
and not trying to do
meditation or anything.
Just be with the breath
and allow the breath
and the cycles of the breath.
So when you breathe out, let
go of any tension or anything
that's concerning
you or worrying you.
And then consciously, as
you breathe in, just breathe
in this possibility, this
peace, this gentleness,
and just allow those
cycles to take you inward.
And something's
waiting there for you.
Something's waiting there for
you, and it will welcome you.
And it will welcome you
to this great adventure.